# Overview

Sea It Rise is a cell phone app and back-end infrastructure to enable the visualization of future sea level rise at shoreline locations. The phone app will also enable the collection of shorline photos for archiving in the back-end system with appropriate metadata in order to build a databasee of shoreline conditions at various tidal stages and wind/weather regimes. 

The phone app will consist of 3 different modes:
  1. Map mode. Screen will show current location on background map. This will be the central view on startup, and provide both a location "beacon" as well as context of expected Relative Sea Level (RSL) from the NOAA Office for Coastal Management. 
  1. Tide/Weather view. Screen will show current and predicted tide heights from COOPS NOAA data as well as summary weather information, date, time and lat/lon etc.
  1. Picture/Augmented Reality View. This will be the default "tool" part of the application. Phone will use it's camera and orientation sensors to collect an image and upload to the back-end server. Augmented reality view will allow the ap to "project" an estimate of sea level rise on top of the image. Ideally this would be locked in real space, so that as you move the handset around the layer stays in the same place. Vuforia or ARKit? not sure.
  
## The problem

Rising seas threaten the infrastructure needed for jobs, industry, recreation and everyday life. Roads, bridges, subways, port facilities, piers, docks, oil and gas wells, power (including nuclear!) plants, sewage treatment plants, coastal levies—the list is practically endless—are all at risk from sea level rise. Rising seas threaten fish habitat, including coral reefs and mangrove forests, and freshwater aquifers. Rising seas are leading to rapid coastal erosion of cliffs and dunes in some local shoreline regions and affect shoreline access for recreational activities. The seas are rising and will rise faster later this century. The historical data is clear and the scientific consensus is unequivocal. Even so, the rate of change is small, and the desire to adapt to sea level increase is not overwhelming. This is unfortunate because sea level rise directly affects public safety, local fisheries, shipping and trade. Indeed, since human society has flourished during a period of relative sea level stability, almost all of our coastal infrastructure and livelihood is built around the current height of the ocean.

## Our Innovation

We envision a smartphone or tablet app that is a cross between Pokémon Go and a mobile tide chart. The basic premise is to use your smartphone as a “viewer” of future sea level rise impact, by using a simple overlay indicating future water levels. Wondering what your favorite beach might look like after a meter of sea level rise? Pull out your smartphone, fire up the app and watch to projection of sea level onto your camera view. Want to record what the beach looks like when the closest tidal gauge is at a certain height? Snap a picture, add a note and upload to an archive of other shoreline pictures taken with the app. Want to compare to other tidal heights? Browse the map and timeline for other images taken nearby! We believe the ability to engage individuals in collecting their own data will spark conversations and interest in a way that showing a map of areas impacted by future sea level rise does not.

## Our Impact

We anticipate both short and long term impacts from the launch of this application. The hook for users is the “gee whiz” aspect of being able to visualize what a high tide will look like in the future. Raising awareness about the impacts of sea level rise and strategies that can be employed for coastal resilience is a key aspect of our idea. Longer term impacts will arise from the crowd sourcing of coastline photographs, combined with data regarding tide height and local weather. As many coastal erosion processes happen over years or decades, having direct observations that can be easily compared will serve to empower local citizens, beach naturalist programs and planning departments. All image data will be shared under the Creative Commons Share Alike license, allowing for the wide dissemination of these photos to further our impact.

This app makes sea level rise personal. It allows the user to stand on the shoreline, see the existing infrastructure nearby, and with just a couple of clicks see what a 5’ increase in the sea level looks like. Will I need to be swimming at this spot in 50 years? The app turns abstract numbers into something tangible. Everyone from an engineer building or repairing a bridge to a homeowner thinking about building a second story on top of their beach shack can see their risk. Augmented reality will help people see the future and use that knowledge to make better decisions today.

